+++
title = 'Determinism'
date = 2024-10-05T16:49:58+01:00
draft = true
+++

Are you the author or the narrator of your thoughts? It's an obvious one you think as you respond to
that question in your mind. But why are you thinking about if you're the author or narrator at all?
Without the prompting of the opening question, would that be something you would be thinking about
today?

When having a conversation, how much of what you say is pre-planned and pre-written in your mind,
and how much just... comes out. I'd imagine it's quite heavily in favour of the latter, even if you
have pre-arranged ideas of *what* you'd like to talk about.

This topic isn't solely a philosophical novelty or plaything, it has far reaching consequences for
the view of the world in which we live.

Though, on the topic of philosophy, it's probably worth clarifying the point I am making and to
clear up any confusion. I am not saying that the world and all actions within it are pre-planned or
written in the books of fate (neatly called 'fatalism'). No what I am outlining is that of
determinism, the idea that actions occur in response to inputs and causes.

## Some other questions
Let's start with something seemingly trivial like the subjects artist paint. Why is it that J.M.W.
Turner painted steam trains and not aeroplanes? Was his imagination not that good, or was he just
reflecting the world that he saw around him? Why do most sci-fi novels of the post-war 20th century
imagine a world of a unified global government or opposing all-powerful state? Was that the extent
of the futures imagined or was that the projection of their own Cold War world being projected
forwards? 

These may sound inconsequential but I think they start to reveal an insight into the underlying
workings of the human mind.

## How we view the world
It's fair to say we are often not aware of the underlying forces that shape our view of the world.
It comes as a surprise to many, and often too late (yes I'm talking about myself here) how being
hangry completely rewrites how you see the world and interactions in it. It's not until you've eaten
and you feel your mood shift that you're aware how that thing that really got under your skin is
really no big deal and easily dealt with. Similarly, it would be naive to say that exogenous
chemicals don't influence and change your view of the world. 

What these examples point to is not the secondary school understanding that we're a soup of
chemicals and hormones but that our perspective of ourselves from within that system is one that can
be obfuscated in such a way that we presume ourselves to be seeing the world clearly and rationally
but in fact we are affected in ways we are not aware of.

Another example is that of how we act and behave around different people. Some people bring out the
best in us, we're effortlessly eloquent and funny around them, but around others we find ourselves
tripping over our words or putting our foot in our mouth. I'm less interested in the reasons for
*why* that happens (is it body language, smell, status etc.) and more interested in the fact that it
happens without our control or knowing, it just happpens - we're a passenger. 

Now to take that idea towards what I'm getting at is the conscious experience we have is composed of
a multitude of factors, influences and processes that we are not privy and have the effect of making
it seem as if we are deciding things deliberately but for which we are merely the last in the chain
to get the message.

Think of many times in your life, most particularly as a child but if we're being honest even as
adults, when someone asks you why you did something. You tend to stand there, slightly taken aback
and realise that, really, you don't know. "Why did you hit your brother?" "Truthfully, I don't know,
I just did". The whole literature regarding the hemispheric differences within our brain provide
ample evidence for the *post-hoc* rationalising nature of our consciousness with the left hemisphere
being a bigger culprit. 

## Modern influences on this view
It would be perhaps comically un-self-aware to not investigate what factors have led me to believe
this worldview accurate. Consciousness is perhaps my main interest and one which seems magical
within the context of the physical world. The descent of how we understand consciousness throughout
history as our technology and hence our metaphors of self-understanding have developed alongside our
scientific inquiry into the structure of the brain from that of the gods speaking through us to the
idea that we are merely biological computers. However language, reasoning, articulation, all of
these have been the reserve of humans ourselves even if computers could do a very good job of the
mathematical side of things. However, with the advent of LLMs in recent years, this too has fallen.
LLMs have shown that human level reasoning and speech is possible through statistical inference.
Whilst their acheivements, training, refinement and deployment are nothing short of extrordinary,
the meme of them being linear algebra on steroids does at least point in the right direction.

Given a prompt, the LLM will find what is most statistically likely to answer that 

## Why this isn't all doom and gloom
Anything that takes away human autonomy or the concept of free-will is going to be unpopular and
normally backfire (more evidence for prompt-response if you will). But we're not rolling out a new
public policy, we're reading essays on the internet so let's proceed.

Here we approach what is seemingly an inconsistency and one for which I don't have an explanation as
yet but let's summarise as this: you can't choose your feelings but you can choose your environment
(which as we've seen determine your feelings). Where does the desire to change your environment come
from? Presumably from the cascade of feelings that the current environment gives you which leaves
you feeling like you want a change.

There is also the spiritual aspect to consider. Taoism for example makes reference to the flowing
and ingraspable nature of reality. There's an underlying view that reality cannot be changed or even
fully understood. To our Western minds this is defeatist and passive, of course we can understand
and shape the world and our destiny. However the view outlined here goes some way to providing some
support for that. We are pushed around by forces outside of our control and whilst we feel that we
are making rational and logical choices, we are in fact simply responding to the prompts that the
world gives us.
